I was just thinking about this on my way home.
I don't know why I was thinking about it.
But, um, y'know... the most brutally honest
stories you tend to get about corruption in
Buddhism tend to be from ex-monks, guys who've
been in the game for a few years and then
retired out of it, or whatever their particular
story might be.
I guess I was kind of prepared for that right
off the bat; one of my professors in university
was himself a former Buddhist monk and he
was brutally honest about corruption in the
context he came from in Japan.
By his own account, y'know, his zen master
was sort of the most respected patriarch at
that time, or the most respected patriarch
who was open to the possibility of having
foreigners study with him.
However, he was only taking on foreigners
who spoke Japanese fluently, and that was
something that my professor already did.
Uh... anyway, so I was still an undergraduate
student myself hearing this story, but, ah...
my professor told me how the minute the zen
master fell asleep at this august and revered
temple, the minute he fell asleep (and he
went to sleep like clockwork at the same time
every night), all of the students (wearing
their full robes) would get up and climb over
the wall (the wall marking the boundary of
the temple) and would go to the nearest whorehouse.
Not a nightclub, not a bar, a brothel.
And, uh, he also specified that only a minority
of the monks would ever have sex when they
were out at the brothel.
I don't know if that was due to piety or,
ah, due to poverty, or what the factors were,
but, um, he said just about all of them would
get drunk and smoke marijuana, and quite a
few of them used other drugs besides.
Uh... his account had a lot of human details
added on to that (that I'm leaving out), but
I remember my questions at the time were just,
uh, "What was the attitude of the monk in
charge?
Didn't he mind, didn't he object, didn't he
try to discipline them?"
And, y'know, my professor, he was really trying
to teach me something.
He said, no, as long as the monks could show
up the next day and perform the rituals with
the correct posture and attitude, as long
as they could sit in the correct position
during the meditation sessions, then the guy
in charge never had any complaints, uh, he
allowed it to continue.
And my prof said, y'know, he would look around
the meditation hall, and he'd be able to see
which guys were struggling with a hangover
(who was more hung-over than the rest) and
every so often some of the guys would have
been staying up so late, partying so hard,
they, uh... that during the long sessions
of sitting zen (where, y'know they sit in
a particular posture, with their knees together,
different from the Theravada posture), every
so often one of them would simply pass out,
sitting upright, and fall forward with a klonk,
their head hitting the ground, passing out
from exhaustion.
Y'know I appreciate the honesty that both
former monks and current monks expressed to
me.
Um, y'know, I think a lot of them could appreciate
the honesty with which I was engaged in what
I was doing, what I was trying to do... and,
um...
I dunno, I certainly appreciated anything
real I was able to make contact with on the
other side, whether that was in monastic institutions
or academic ones or what-have-you.
On the more poverty-stricken side of the game,
I knew a former monk in Laos, and when I knew
him he had become a, uh, communist bureaucrat
of a very low rank, but, obviously, in a communist
country a large percentage of people are employed
by the government as bureaucrats of one kind
or another.
Bureaucracy gobbles up more and more of society
the further left you go on the political spectrum.
And, um... he told me that when he was quite
a young man (I don't know if he was a teenager
or in his 20s), he received a scholarship
to go from Laos to Thailand, and to study
in the number one temple in Chiang Mai.
So this is, y'know, on the kind of official
government-ranked list (which does exist in
a country like Thailand, the government and
the monarchy are quite involved in how religion
is organized there)... uh, this was the number
one, official "greatest temple" for Northern
Thailand, that of course doubled as a sort
of monastic university.
So this guy received a scholarship, and this
would have been back in the more high, Soviet
period of Communism, when the relations between
the two countries were closer to war at any
given moment, so [this was] politically significant
as well as religiously significant.
And when he got there, this earnest, communist
monk from Laos, when he got there expecting
to get an education in Buddhism, of course
what he got was an education in just how corrupt
Buddhism in Thailand really is.
And, uh, the first time a big festival day
came up (I think it was Thai New Year, it
was one of the big festivals where everyone
gets out in the streets and gets drunk and
parties in the major cities of Thailand),
the monks in his temple (so these were the
privileged students, mostly from the Thai
elite, going to this elite temple), they all
said, "Oh, don't worry about it, we'll do
the same thing we do when we want to go out
to a nightclub."
And they, uh, they put on baseball hats and,
uh, sort of loose-fitting hip-hop clothing,
so that nobody would notice that they had
shaved heads, or the shaved heads wouldn't
look as remarkable, and they went out and
partied.
They joined the crowd.
And, uh, he said that he himself and the other
monks who were there on scholarship from Laos
(there were a couple), they were, y'know,
terrified of this, and they tried to be more
respectful of whatever the tradition was,
raising the question of "How can you respect
the tradition while defying the reality of
what that tradition is?"
Because the tradition is that you put on a
baseball hat and you go out and party with
the other corrupt monks.
So, are you going to fight against that?
Are you maybe going to get kicked out of the
institution you're in because you're not willing
to play ball with the types of corruption
that are going on there?
I had contact with two different western monks
who were attached to what many people would
consider the single most respected temple
in Bangkok, again, with formal connections
to the monarchy and what-have-you.
The, uh, "the marble temple", it's called
in English.
One of them was more brutal than the other
in his assessment --well, I should say, one
of them was still a monk when I spoke to him
(he was a westerner who was living there as
a monk) and the other was an ex-monk.
But that ex-monk (I'm not going to give away
too many details), he had risen to the absolute
highest place of prominence possible; he was
working in the offices of monks very directly
connected to the royal family and the government
--at the absolute highest level.
[He was] the equivalent to being a right-hand
man for the pope in Catholicism.
That guy really moved up the ladder because
he had skills that were useful to the institution.
Anyway, he was staying in the marble temple
and, wow, I mean, both the financial corruption
--the fact that everything these monks were
doing was motivated by money, very, very directly
(he was brutally honest in talking about that)--
and the absence of any other motive, of any
real scholarship going on, any real education,
any real religious practice of any kind (he
was brutally honest about that).
Something else that was outstanding to me...
and that guy spoke to me for many hours, on
a couple of different meetings... something
else that was outstanding to me in his account
of his experience with the corruption of monastic
Buddhism was that the monks who were not corrupt
were regarded with hatred and contempt by
the organized majority of the monks who were
there to make money.
So, um, that's a dynamic that exists in both
politics and religion, where people will say
to you, if you're the one person who doesn't
want to be corrupt, "Oh, why do you have to
cause a problem?"
"Why do you have to make waves?"
When you're in an institutionally corrupt
context, you're in a situation of conflict
whether you like it or not.
And people are going to be making waves with
you, even if you think you can have an aloof
attitude, a detached attitude, or that you're
not going to, uh... you're not going to be
a martyr to your ideals.
There are plenty of people surrounding you
who will be all-too-happy to make a martyr
out of you.